Micro-Hermes: A Userspace Simulation Toward an Open-Source eBPF Layer-7 Load Balancer

CS5099 Dissertation Draft

Student: 250014506

University of St Andrews
Computer Science MSc
[insert date of submission]

Abstract

Layer 7 load balancers dispatch incoming TCP connections from the kernel
to userspace worker processes, but the two mechanisms Linux provides for
this (epoll's exclusive wakeup and SO_REUSEPORT's stateless hash) are
blind to how busy each worker is. Because the cost of Layer 7
work (TLS handshakes, compression, protocol translation) varies wildly
between connections, this blindness concentrates load on a few workers,
inflates tail latency, and keeps routing traffic to hung workers. Hermes
(Pan et al., 2025), a production system at Alibaba Cloud, closes this
gap: workers publish their live status into shared memory, and an in-kernel
eBPF program steers each new connection towards workers marked
as available. Hermes is closed-source. This dissertation presents
Micro-Hermes, an open-source Rust implementation of Hermes, built in two
phases: a complete userspace simulation of the three-stage feedback loop
(this work), designed so a later phase can swap the simulated kernel
components for a real eBPF program. The simulation uses real forked (separate OS)
processes, shared memory, and lock-free atomics, and is evaluated
against models of both standard Linux scheduling mechanisms across the paper's
four traffic regimes, plus a novel sudden-burst scenario. The
results reproduce the paper's central claim: neither
standard mechanism is safe in every regime, while Hermes detects and
routes around hung workers within a fixed timeframe, balances
long-lived connections an order of magnitude more evenly than epoll exclusive,
and remains competitive everywhere. Deviations from the
paper's rankings are attributed to documented limitations of the userspace
simulation rather than Hermes itself.

Declaration

I hereby certify that this dissertation, which is approximately [insert
word count] words in length, has been composed by me, that it is the
record of work carried out by me and that it has not been submitted in
any previous application for a degree. This project was conducted by me
at the University of St Andrews from [insert month/year] to [insert
month/year] towards fulfilment of the requirements of the University of
St Andrews for the degree of [insert degree title] under the supervision
of [insert name].

In submitting this project report to the University of St Andrews, I
give permission for it to be published online. I retain the copyright in
this work.

[insert date] [insert signature]

Table of Contents

1. Introduction

1.1 Motivation

1.2 Problem Statement

1.3 Aims and Objectives

1.4 Report Structure

2. Context Survey

2.1 A Brief History of Load Balancing

2.2 The Layer 4 vs Layer 7 Distinction

2.3 Connection Scheduling Inside a Single Server

2.4 eBPF and Kernel Programmability

2.5 The Hermes Architecture

3. Related Work

3.1 Classical Scheduling and Load Balancing Theory

3.2 Layer 4 eBPF Load Balancing

3.3 Intra-Server Request Scheduling

3.4 Layer 7 and Application-Aware Load Balancing

3.5 Positioning Micro-Hermes

4. Requirements Specification

5. Software Engineering Process

6. Ethics

7. Design

7.1 Two-Phase Approach and System Architecture Overview

7.2 Worker Status Table

7.3 Kernel Connection Dispatcher

7.4 Userspace Scheduler

7.5 Alternative Scheduling Algorithms

8. Implementation

8.1 Rust Toolchain and eBPF Integration

8.2 Shared Memory Communication

8.3 Simulating the Kernel Dispatch Path

8.4 Engineering Challenges

9. Evaluation and Critical Appraisal

9.1 Evaluation Framework and Methodology

9.2 Benchmarks: Micro-Hermes vs reuseport vs epoll_exclusive

9.3 Worker Hang Prevention Results

9.4 Scheduler Filter Behaviour

9.5 Discussion

10. Conclusions

10.1 Summary of Contributions

10.2 Limitations

10.3 Future Work

Appendix A: Testing Summary

Appendix B: User Manual

Appendix C: Ethics Self-Assessment

References

1. Introduction

1.1 Motivation

Cloud providers place a Layer 7 (L7) load balancer in front of nearly
every web service they host. These systems terminate TLS, parse
and route HTTP, compress responses, and translate between protocol
versions, all at the rate of hundreds of thousands of new connections
per second. Internally, an L7 load balancer is typically structured as
one worker process pinned to each CPU core, each running an event loop
over epoll (Garrett, 2015). The operating system decides which worker
receives each new connection. This decision is important as a connection
assigned to an overloaded worker is queued behind expensive work; it cannot
escape as established connections cannot migrate between workers.

Operational experience at Alibaba Cloud shows how badly this can go
wrong. Pan et al. (2025) report a production incident in which a single
worker, stuck in a read loop, dragged request
latency from 30 milliseconds to 440 seconds for every connection pinned
to it, while the kernel, unaware the worker was hung, continued to
assign it new connections. The root cause is architectural: the two
mechanisms Linux offers for distributing connections across workers make
their choice using either the wakeup order of a kernel wait queue or a
stateless hash, and neither consults the one thing that predicts whether
a worker can take on more work: its actual runtime status in userspace.

Hermes, the system Alibaba built in response, fixes this with a
feedback loop: workers write their live status into shared memory, a
lightweight userspace scheduler distils that status into a set of
candidate workers, and an eBPF program inside the kernel forwards each new
connection to one of the candidates. In production it reduced daily
worker hangs by 99.8% and infrastructure unit cost by 18.9% (Pan et al.,
2025). But Hermes is closed-source and embedded in a proprietary
hyperscale system. Its architecture is published, but its code, and therefore
any independent validation of its claims, is not. This project exists to
change that by implementing the Hermes architecture in the open, in Rust,
and test whether its published behaviour can be reproduced outside
Alibaba.

1.2 Problem Statement

There are two main problems this dissertation addresses:

First, the technical problem inherited from Hermes: kernel connection
dispatch is blind to userspace load. epoll's exclusive wakeup mode
prefers the most recently registered worker, which concentrates connections
onto a few workers. SO_REUSEPORT's hash spreads connections evenly on
average but keeps blindly dispatching to workers that are overloaded, hung, or
crashed. L7 processing cost varies by orders of magnitude between
connections and is unknowable at dispatch time, so per-worker load
diverges even under a perfectly uniform hash. Only userspace knows how
loaded a worker really is, and only the kernel decides where connections go.
A correct solution must carry information across that boundary cheaply
and safely.

Second, the research problem this project takes on: Hermes demonstrates
a solution at hyperscale, but as a closed system its results cannot be
independently reproduced, its architecture cannot be studied or extended
by others, and organisations without Alibaba's infrastructure cannot
adopt it. Can the Hermes architecture be reimplemented faithfully from
its published description, and does the reimplementation reproduce the
qualitative behaviour the paper claims, like its adaptability
across traffic regimes and its time bounded detection of hung workers?

1.3 Aims and Objectives

The aim of the project is a faithful, open-source implementation of the
Hermes architecture, developed in two phases: Phase 1 (this
dissertation) implements and evaluates the complete three-stage feedback
loop as a userspace simulation, with the kernel pieces replaced
by userspace stand-ins; Phase 2 (future work)
replaces those stand-ins with real eBPF code. The objectives, in
order of importance:

O1. Implement the full Hermes feedback loop in Rust: the shared-memory
Worker Status Table with its three atomically updated metrics, the
per-worker cascading-filter scheduler (Algorithm 1), and the
per-connection dispatcher (Algorithm 2), preserving the paper's
lock-free concurrency design and its division between kernel and
userspace.

O2. Implement baseline models of the two main dispatch mechanisms:
SO_REUSEPORT's stateless hash and epoll exclusive's
LIFO wakeup, so that they may be compared against Hermes under identical
workloads.

O3. Reproduce the paper's evaluation methodology: its four traffic
regimes (crossing high/low connection rate and low/high per-connection
cost), an injected worker hang, and its primary balance metric (the
standard deviation of worker connection counts), and validate the
implementation against the paper's qualitative rankings rather than only
raw numbers.

O4. Extend the evaluation beyond the paper with a scenario that directly
measures the cost of concentrating connections: a synchronised burst of
requests from accumulated long-lived connections, the failure scenario the
Worker Status Table's connection-count metric exists to prevent.

O5. (If possible) Begin the Phase 2 port of the dispatch path to a real eBPF
program attached via SO_ATTACH_REUSEPORT_EBPF using the Aya toolchain.
Objectives O1, O2, and O4 were achieved in full. O3 was achieved with two
explained deviations from the paper's rankings, both attributed to a specific
limitation of the userspace simulation (Section 9.5) rather than to the architecture itself.
While O5 was not in scope of Phase 1, the codebase is structured so that the
port replaces components rather than restructuring the entire system (Section 7.1).

1.4 Report Structure

Chapter 2 is a context survey on the history of load balancing, the
Layer 4 / Layer 7 distinction, the Linux mechanisms for distributing
connections inside a single server, eBPF, and the Hermes architecture
itself. Chapter 3 reviews related work and positions Micro-Hermes
within it. Chapter 4 specifies the requirements the software had to
meet, and Chapter 5 describes the development process. Chapter 6 records
ethical considerations. Chapters 7 and 8 present the design and
implementation of the Phase 1 simulation, Chapter 9 evaluates it against
the two baseline mechanisms and against the paper's published behaviour,
and Chapter 10 concludes with contributions, limitations, and future
work. Appendices provide the testing summary, a user manual for
building and reproducing every result, and the ethics self-assessment.

!! do we need a user guide? 

2. Context Survey

2.1 A Brief History of Load Balancing

Load balancing, distributing incoming work across a pool of servers so
that no one server becomes a bottleneck, is nearly as old as the web
itself. The earliest widely deployed mechanism was round-robin DNS,
standardised in the mid-1990s, in which a name server hands out a
rotating list of addresses for the same hostname (Brisco, 1995). DNS
balancing is coarse: it cannot see server load, cannot react to failures
faster than a client's cached DNS address (TTL) expires, and offers no
per-connection control, only per DNS lookup. Through the late 1990s and
2000s the industry answer was the dedicated hardware appliance, a middlebox
terminating traffic for a virtual IP and spreading it across backends,
alongside early software alternatives in the operating system kernel, most
notably the Linux Virtual Server project, which added transport-layer
(Layer 4) load balancing directly into Linux (Zhang, 2000).

Hardware appliances scale poorly in terms of cost and flexibility, therefore
hyperscalers eventually replaced them with software load
balancers running on commodity machines. Microsoft's Ananta split the
load balancer into a replicated control plane and a scale-out data
plane of software muxes (Patel et al., 2013). Google's Maglev showed a
single commodity server saturating 10 Gbps line rate using consistent
hashing to keep connection-to-backend mappings stable as the pool
changes (Eisenbud et al., 2016). Subsequent research pushed the same
frontier further: Beamer removed per-connection state from the balancer
entirely by leveraging state already held at the backends (Olteanu et
al., 2018), and Cheetah made per-connection consistency a guarantee
rather than a probabilistic property (Barbette et al., 2020).


Hardware appliances scale poorly in terms of cost and flexibility. As a result,
hyperscalers eventually replaced them with software load balancers running on
commodity machines. An early example is Microsoft's Ananta, which separated the
load balancer into two distinct components. A control plane made routing
decisions (which backend pool a connection should be sent to) and was
replicated across multiple instances for fault tolerance since it did not
need to touch every packet directly. A data plane, composed of a scale-out
fleet of software "muxes" running on commodity hardware, handled the actual
forwarding of traffic according to the control plane's decisions, and could be
scaled simply by adding more machines (Patel et al., 2013).

Google's Maglev also demonstrated that this software-based approach could match
the raw performance of dedicated hardware: a single commodity server was shown
to saturate a 10 Gbps network link using ordinary machines rather than
specialised appliances. Maglev also introduced the use of consistent hashing to
determine which backend server should handle a given connection. This mattered
because a naive hashing scheme would remap the vast majority of connections to
different backends whenever a single server was added to or removed from the
pool, which is highly disruptive for connections that rely on backend-held state.
Consistent hashing ensures only a small proportion of connection-to-backend
mappings change when the backend pool changes size (Eisenbud et al., 2016).

Subsequent research expanded on these ideas. Beamer removed the need for the
load balancer to maintain any per-connection state at all, instead relying on
state that the backend servers held prior to correctly route packets belonging
to established connections (Olteanu et al., 2018). Cheetah went further still:
where consistent hashing made misrouting unlikely during a pool change without
ruling it out entirely, Cheetah made correct per-connection routing a strict
guarantee by ensuring connections are always routed to the correct backend,
even while the backend pool is changing (Barbette et al., 2020).

All of these systems answer the question "which machine should serve
this connection?". This dissertation is concerned with the question one
level down, which arises after the machine has been chosen: which
worker process on that machine should serve it? The same imbalance
problem occurs here; uneven work sizes, stateless assignment,
workers that hang. However, the mechanisms available are
different as the "scheduler" is the operating system kernel and
the "servers" are processes sharing its cores.

2.2 The Layer 4 vs Layer 7 Distinction

Load balancers are conventionally divided by the network layer at which
they operate. A Layer 4 (L4) balancer forwards packets: it selects a
backend using the connection's addressing 5-tuple, rewrites or
encapsulates headers, and never inspects payload. Its per-connection
cost is small and roughly uniform, proportional to packet count. A
Layer 7 (L7) balancer, by contrast, terminates the connection and
operates on application content: it performs the TLS handshake, parses
HTTP, routes on headers or paths, compresses responses, and translates
between protocol versions (HAProxy Technologies, 2024). Widely deployed
examples include HAProxy, NGINX and Envoy (HAProxy Technologies, 2024;
Garrett, 2015; Envoy Proxy Authors, 2024).

Two consequences of L7 matter here. First, per-connection cost
is highly variable and unknowable in advance: one connection may need a
full TLS handshake plus regex routing while its neighbour is a simple
keep-alive request, and which is which only becomes apparent during
processing. Queue depth, the classic L4 load signal, is therefore a
poor proxy for L7 load. Second, the standard L7 server architecture is
a set of worker processes, one pinned to each CPU core, each running a
run-to-completion event loop over epoll. NGINX popularised this design
and documents it in detail (Garrett, 2015). Connections are pinned to
the worker that accepts them for their entire lifetime — migrating
established connections across workers is not practical, since the
connection's protocol state (TLS session, parser state, buffers) lives
in that worker's memory. Every dispatch decision is therefore
permanent, which is what makes the dispatch mechanism worth engineering
carefully.

A third consequence follows from multi-tenancy, and it is the setting
Hermes was built for. A cloud L7 load balancer serves many tenants from
the same worker pool, and Alibaba's architecture isolates them by
port: before traffic reaches the L7 LB, the layer below rewrites each
tenant's port-80/443 traffic to a distinct destination port, and the
L7 LB binds a separate listening socket to each port (Pan et al.,
2025). This gives per-tenant traffic management (rate limiting,
accounting) at port granularity, but it also means ports vastly
outnumber workers — on the order of ten thousand ports against tens of
workers — so every worker necessarily serves traffic from a large
number of tenants at once. That raises the stakes of the dispatch
decision: when one worker is overloaded, the latency penalty is not
confined to one misbehaving tenant but shared by every tenant whose
connections happen to be pinned there. Inter-worker load balancing is
therefore not only a performance concern but the mechanism by which a
multi-tenant load balancer preserves performance isolation between
tenants. The port-per-tenant design also matters mechanically for the
comparison in this dissertation: with epoll's shared-socket pattern,
every worker registers interest in every port, so kernel-side wakeup
work grows with the number of ports — a cost that will resurface in
the evaluation (Section 9.5).

2.3 Connection Scheduling Inside a Single Server

When multiple workers listen for the same incoming connections, the
kernel must decide which worker accepts each one. Linux provides two
production mechanisms, and both were designed for correctness and
throughput rather than balance.

The mechanisms sit atop the kernel's I/O event notification facility.
Early Unix multiplexing primitives — select and poll — scan the full
descriptor set on every call and scale poorly to the tens of thousands
of sockets a load balancer holds; BSD's kqueue (Lemon, 2001) and
Linux's epoll (Linux man-pages, 2023) replaced them with stateful
interfaces whose cost tracks
the number of *ready* descriptors rather than the number monitored,
which is why epoll underpins essentially every high-performance Linux
network server today.

The older dispatch pattern gives all workers one shared listening
socket and has each register it with epoll. Historically, a new
connection woke every waiting worker — the "thundering herd" — of
which all but one found nothing to accept. The classic userspace
workaround, still available in NGINX as accept_mutex, serialises
accept-side polling behind an application-level lock so only one
worker listens at a time (NGINX, 2024) — avoiding the herd at the cost
of putting a lock on the accept path. Linux 4.5 addressed the problem
in the kernel instead, adding the EPOLLEXCLUSIVE flag so that only
one waiter is woken per event (Baron, 2015a; Corbet, 2015). The
implementation detail that matters for this dissertation is *which*
worker gets woken: workers are inserted at the head of the socket's
wait queue when they register, the queue is traversed from the head on
each wakeup, and traversal stops at the first idle worker. The net
effect is LIFO selection — the most recently registered (and, in steady
state, most recently active) worker is preferred, so connections
concentrate on a few workers while others starve. Cloudflare measured
exactly this in production NGINX: one worker absorbing the bulk of new
connections while the last worker received almost none (Majkowski,
2017). A patch adding a round-robin wakeup mode (EPOLLROUNDROBIN) was
proposed alongside EPOLLEXCLUSIVE to fix the imbalance, but was never
merged into the mainline kernel, in part because rotating the wait
queue is cache-unfriendly (Baron, 2015b; Corbet, 2015).

The newer pattern is SO_REUSEPORT, added in Linux 3.9, which lets each
worker bind its own listening socket to the same port; the kernel then
selects a socket — and hence a worker — per connection using a
stateless hash of the connection's 4-tuple (Kerrisk, 2013). Each worker
gets a private accept queue, removing the shared-queue contention and
the thundering herd entirely; NGINX's adoption of it ("socket
sharding") measured 2–3x higher connection throughput (NGINX, 2015).
The hash spreads connections evenly *in expectation*, but it is blind:
it does not know that one worker is stuck in a slow TLS handshake, or
hung, or dead — it keeps hashing a fixed 1/N share of new connections
to a worker regardless of the worker's state, and hash collisions under
heavy-hitter traffic can skew even the expectation.

The two mechanisms thus fail in complementary ways: exclusive wakeup is
load-aware only in the degenerate sense of preferring "not currently
busy", with a LIFO bias that concentrates load; reuseport is perfectly
unbiased but perfectly blind. Neither can incorporate what the worker
itself knows — how many events it has pending, how many connections it
holds, whether it is making progress at all.

Nor is the problem an artefact of epoll that newer interfaces resolve.
io_uring, Linux's next-generation asynchronous I/O framework (Linux
man-pages, 2024), wakes waiters in its default interrupt mode in a
fixed FIFO order — a different bias from epoll exclusive's LIFO, but
equally blind to worker load, and so equally capable of uneven
process load (Pan et al., 2025). The blindness is structural: any
wakeup-order policy fixed at registration time, whatever its order,
dispatches without consulting worker state. Getting that knowledge
into the kernel's dispatch decision requires a mechanism for running
user-supplied logic at the socket-selection moment, which is exactly
what eBPF provides.

2.4 eBPF and Kernel Programmability

The Berkeley Packet Filter began as a small in-kernel virtual machine
for running user-supplied packet filters safely at capture time
(McCanne & Jacobson, 1993). Linux's extended BPF (eBPF) generalises the
idea into a kernel-wide extension mechanism: programs written against a
restricted instruction set are verified by a kernel-side static
verifier — which proves memory safety and termination before the
program is admitted — then JIT-compiled and attached to hook points
throughout the kernel, from system-call tracing to network packet
processing (Vieira et al., 2020; eBPF.io, 2024). Verified safety is
what distinguishes eBPF from kernel modules: a buggy eBPF program is
rejected at load time rather than crashing the kernel. The price is
programmability: no unbounded loops, no heap allocation, bounded
program size, and communication with userspace only through typed
shared "maps" — key/value structures readable and writable from both
sides.

In networking, eBPF programs attach at several layers. At the lowest,
XDP runs programs in the network driver before the kernel stack ever
sees the packet, enabling line-rate packet processing on commodity
hardware (Høiland-Jørgensen et al., 2018). Higher up — and central to
this project — the SO_ATTACH_REUSEPORT_EBPF socket option (Linux 4.5)
attaches an eBPF program to a SO_REUSEPORT socket group, letting the
program override the kernel's default hash and choose *which socket*
receives each incoming connection via the bpf_sk_select_reuseport
helper. This is the precise hook Hermes uses: it turns the reuseport
group's socket selection, formerly a fixed hash, into a programmable
decision that can consult state pushed down from userspace through an
eBPF map.

The hook is not exotic — it already carries production traffic at
several major operators, which is evidence for its maturity. Meta uses
it to migrate established listening sockets between old and new server
processes during software releases, achieving connection-preserving
restarts of a multi-billion-user service (Naseer et al., 2020). NGINX
uses it to route QUIC packets sharing a connection ID to the same
worker (NGINX, 2021). Cloudflare contributed a sibling hook, sk_lookup,
that lets an eBPF program choose the receiving socket before the
standard lookup runs at all, decoupling services from the IP/port they
are addressed by (Fayed et al., 2021). What distinguishes Hermes from
all of these is the *input* to the programmable decision: their
steering logic is static or application-defined (a release phase, a
QUIC connection ID, an addressing rule), whereas Hermes closes a
feedback loop — the selection adapts continuously to measured worker
runtime status.

This project implements in Rust, targeting the Aya library for its
eBPF phase. Rust's ownership-based type system provides memory safety
without garbage collection, making it suited to systems code on both
sides of the kernel boundary (Matsakis & Klock, 2014); Aya is a pure-
Rust eBPF library that compiles eBPF programs and manages maps without
depending on the C libbpf toolchain (Aya Contributors, 2024).

2.5 The Hermes Architecture

Hermes (Pan et al., 2025) is Alibaba Cloud's answer to the blindness
described in Section 2.3, deployed in production in front of
multi-tenant cloud traffic and published at SIGCOMM 2025. Its central
idea is to treat the userspace worker's runtime status as a first-class
scheduling input, and to feed it back into the kernel's dispatch
decision through eBPF. The architecture is a closed feedback loop in
three stages.

Stage 1 (status update): each worker maintains three metrics in a
shared-memory Worker Status Table (WST) as a side effect of its normal
event loop: the timestamp of its most recent loop entry (a liveness
signal — a hung worker stops re-entering its loop), the number of
epoll events delivered but not yet handled (a proxy for instantaneous
processing load; the paper found event count alone correlates well
enough with processing time, whereas packet sizes are only known after
processing), and its count of open connections (a guard against future
overload when many idle, long-lived connections burst simultaneously).
Each metric is an individual atomic integer; the table is partitioned
so each worker writes only its own column, and readers take no locks —
occasional stale reads are accepted by design as harmless to a
scheduling heuristic.

Stage 2 (userspace scheduling): at the end of every event-loop
iteration, each worker — there is no dedicated scheduler process — runs
a three-stage cascading filter over the whole WST: drop workers whose
timestamp is stale (hung), then drop workers with above-average
connection counts, then drop workers with above-average pending events,
each "average" softened by an offset θ that prevents the candidate set
from collapsing. The surviving candidate set is encoded as a bitmap and
written into an eBPF map with a single atomic store.

Stage 3 (kernel dispatch): on each new connection, an eBPF program
attached via SO_ATTACH_REUSEPORT_EBPF reads the bitmap, hashes the
connection's 4-tuple into the number of set bits, and selects the
corresponding candidate's socket. If one or zero candidates survive,
the program falls back to the kernel's default reuseport hash.

The division of labour between Stages 2 and 3 is deliberate: new
connections can arrive at hundreds of thousands per second, far faster
than any userspace scheduler can refresh its decision, so userspace
performs coarse-grained filtering (a set of acceptable workers) and the
kernel performs fine-grained per-connection selection within that set.
Publishing a single "best" worker instead would funnel every connection
arriving between updates onto it. Equally deliberate is keeping the
scheduler in userspace: the kernel lacks application context, and
eBPF's restricted programmability would make the filter logic and its
dynamic policy updates awkward to express; only the final decision — a
bitmap in a single integer — crosses the boundary.

The paper's evaluation characterises traffic by two axes —
connections per second and average per-connection processing time —
yielding four regimes, and measures each mechanism in each regime at
three offered-load levels. Its production measurements make the
regimes concrete: across four global regions, the long-lived-
connection regime (its Case 3) accounts for 56.2% of traffic on
average and the expensive-processing regime (Case 4) for another
31.7% — and these two dominant regimes are precisely where epoll
exclusive and reuseport respectively perform worst (Pan et al., 2025).
No single existing mechanism wins in all four regimes; Hermes's design
goal is to be best or near-best in every one. This
adaptability-over-victory framing is inherited by the evaluation in
Chapter 9.

The measured cost of all of this is small: 0.674%–2.436% of CPU
depending on load, dominated under heavy load by the map-update system
calls rather than by the eBPF dispatcher itself, which costs at most
0.043% (Pan et al., 2025). The production impact was large: a 99.8%
reduction in daily worker hangs, an 18.9% reduction in infrastructure
unit cost, and per-worker connection-count balance (standard deviation
20) an order of magnitude better than epoll exclusive (3,200) and
better than reuseport (50). Hermes, however, is closed-source: the
paper publishes the architecture and algorithms in enough detail to
reimplement, but no code or data. That gap is the opening for this
project.

3. Related Work

3.1 Classical Scheduling and Load Balancing Theory

The problem of distributing work across CPU cores has a long history in
operating systems research. Classical CPU schedulers, such as the
Completely Fair Scheduler (CFS) in Linux, aim to divide processing time
equitably among threads based on runtime metrics (Molnar, 2007). These
schedulers, which operate at the process level, are well studied, but
they equalise CPU time rather than request cost: they have no mechanism
to account for the nature of individual network connections, or for the
imbalance that arises when some requests are significantly heavier than
others — a request requiring a TLS handshake or on-the-fly compression
is far more CPU-intensive, and far more variable in cost, than a
typical connection on the same server.

Network scheduling has similarly been studied in the context of packet
queuing and traffic shaping, with disciplines like weighted fair queuing
(WFQ) designed to prevent any one flow from monopolising bandwidth
(Demers et al., 1989). While these approaches are foundational, they
operate at the traffic level rather than the application level and do
not address the worker-level fairness problem that arises inside a
single server process.

The theory of randomised load balancing supplies two results that
illuminate Hermes's design, even though the paper does not cite them.
The "power of two choices" result shows that adding even a tiny amount
of load information to random assignment — sampling two queues and
picking the shorter — improves the maximum queue length exponentially
over blind random placement (Mitzenmacher, 2001); Hermes's coarse
candidate filter can be read as an engineered variant of the same
principle, constraining a blind hash to a load-vetted subset.
Join-Idle-Queue goes further and is structurally the closest
theoretical ancestor of Hermes's design: idle processors register
themselves in an "idle queue" that dispatchers consult at assignment
time, decoupling the communication of load information from the
dispatch critical path (Lu et al., 2011). Hermes's candidate bitmap is
exactly such a precomputed availability structure — maintained
asynchronously by the workers, consulted synchronously (and nearly for
free) by the kernel at each connection arrival.

While this scheduling lineage shares the core goal of distributing
uneven workloads fairly, it operates in different environments —
cluster dispatchers, packet queues, or abstract queueing models. It
provides the conceptual framework, but not a mechanism for the specific
setting here: routing kernel-accepted connections between the worker
processes of a single server.

3.2 Layer 4 eBPF Load Balancing

A significant body of recent work applies eBPF at Layer 4 (the
transport layer) for load balancing across clusters of servers. These
systems are designed for high-throughput packet forwarding in data
centre environments.

Meta's Katran is a widely deployed example: it uses eBPF and XDP to
perform consistent-hash-based load balancing across backend servers at
line rate, handling tens of millions of packets per second per core
(Shirokov & Dasineni, 2018). Cilium similarly leverages eBPF to replace
kube-proxy in Kubernetes environments, providing cluster-wide load
balancing and network policy enforcement without the overhead of
iptables (Cilium Authors, 2024).

Academic work continues in this direction: CRAB removes the load
balancer from the connection datapath altogether, participating only
in TCP connection establishment before redirecting the client to the
chosen backend directly (Kogias et al., 2020), and HEELS brings that
connection-establishment-only idea to commodity hosts using eBPF (Yang
& Kogias, 2023). Below the transport layer entirely, RSS++ makes the
NIC's receive-side-scaling hash *load-aware*, reprogramming the RSS
indirection table from measured per-core load to rebalance packet
processing across cores (Barbette et al., 2019) — the closest thing at
packet granularity to what Hermes does at connection granularity.

These systems are all relevant prior art, but they address a
fundamentally different problem from Micro-Hermes. Because they operate
at or below Layer 4, on packets or connection establishment before any
application processing, they have no visibility into application-layer
information such as per-worker processing load, and their unit of
placement is a backend machine or a CPU core's packet queue. They
cannot determine whether a particular worker process is idle or
overwhelmed. Their goal is infrastructure-scale traffic distribution,
not intra-server worker fairness.

3.3 Intra-Server Request Scheduling

A separate research line attacks the same intra-server problem Hermes
targets — tail latency caused by poor assignment of work to cores. The
earliest work stayed inside the stock kernel: Affinity-Accept modified
Linux so that a connection is accepted and processed on the core that
received its packets, giving each core a local accept queue and
work-stealing between them, and showed substantial throughput gains
from connection locality alone (Pesterev et al., 2012) — an intra-
server connection-placement system a decade before Hermes, though
driven by cache locality rather than worker load. Later systems went
further by replacing the kernel's networking and scheduling stack
outright: ZygOS builds a specialised dataplane OS that work-steals
microsecond-scale requests across cores to approximate a single-queue
system (Prekas et al., 2017). Shinjuku adds preemption at microsecond
granularity, using virtualisation hardware to interrupt long requests
so short ones are not stuck behind them (Kaffes et al., 2019).
Shenango and Caladan reallocate whole cores between applications at
microsecond timescales to keep latency-critical tasks responsive under
interference (Ousterhout et al., 2019; Fried et al., 2020).

These dataplane systems achieve substantially stronger tail-latency
guarantees than any dispatch-time policy can, because they can correct
a bad initial placement after the fact — stealing, preempting, or
reassigning work that has already arrived. But they do so by replacing
the operating system's I/O path, requiring applications to be
rewritten against new interfaces and operators to run non-standard
stacks. A softer version of the same idea is the userspace dispatcher
pattern used by systems such as PostgreSQL: one process fetches all
I/O events and hands them to backend workers under an explicitly fair
policy (PostgreSQL Global Development Group, 2024). That works when
backend jobs are expensive relative to dispatch, but for a load
balancer facing hundreds of thousands of new connections per second
the dispatcher itself sits on the critical path and becomes the
bottleneck — the reason Hermes keeps dispatch in the kernel and embeds
its scheduler inside the existing workers rather than adding a
dispatch process (Pan et al., 2025).

The kernel community has recently moved toward the same philosophy
Hermes embodies. sched_ext, merged in Linux 6.12, lets an eBPF program
define the kernel's *process* scheduling policy, with safety
guaranteed by the verifier and a watchdog fallback to the default
scheduler (Linux Kernel Documentation, 2024). Its vision — userspace-
defined scheduling policy executed safely inside the kernel via eBPF —
is exactly Hermes's; the difference is the scheduled object: sched_ext
places processes onto cores, Hermes places connections onto processes.
That the mainline kernel has adopted the pattern for the harder,
general case strengthens the argument that eBPF-programmable dispatch
is a durable interface rather than a niche trick.

Hermes thus occupies a deliberately different point in the design
space from the dataplane OSes: it keeps stock Linux, stock epoll, and
the existing application architecture, and improves only the dispatch
decision, accepting that connections cannot move after placement
(Section 2.2). Its bet is that for L7 load balancer workloads, getting
the *initial* placement right — informed by live worker status —
captures most of the benefit at a tiny fraction of the deployment
cost. Micro-Hermes inherits that bet.

3.4 Layer 7 and Application-Aware Load Balancing

Layer 7 load balancers operate at the application layer and can make
routing decisions based on application-level information such as
request type, headers, or session affinity. Software load balancers
such as HAProxy and NGINX perform Layer 7 load balancing in userspace,
typically acting as reverse proxies that accept all connections and
forward them to backends (HAProxy Technologies, 2024). While flexible
and feature-rich, these systems introduce additional latency from the
proxy hop — and, crucially for this project, they are themselves
subject to the intra-server dispatch problem of Section 2.3: the proxy
is exactly the kind of multi-worker epoll server whose internal
connection distribution the kernel handles blindly.

Academic work on L7 load balancers has concentrated on the layer
*above* the single machine. Yoda decouples the L7 LB's connection
state from the machines serving it, storing TCP state in a replicated
store so that any instance can take over any connection, and thereby
makes the L7 LB itself highly available and horizontally scalable
(Gandhi et al., 2016). Later systems offload the L7 LB's work to
hardware — SmartNICs (AccelTCP; Moon et al., 2020) or programmable
switches — to cut its CPU cost. All of this effort treats the load
balancer machine as a black box: how connections are spread across the
worker processes *inside* each instance is left to the kernel
mechanisms of Section 2.3, and, as the Hermes authors note from
production experience, it is precisely that userspace workload
handling, not kernel connection management, that consumes most of an
L7 LB's CPU (Pan et al., 2025). Intra-server dispatch is therefore the
underserved layer of the L7 load-balancing stack, and improvements to
it compose with — rather than compete against — all of the above.

The system most directly relevant to this project is Hermes (Pan et
al., 2025), described in detail in Section 2.5: an industry system from
Alibaba Cloud that makes the kernel's intra-server dispatch decision
status-aware using shared memory and eBPF, reporting a 99.8% reduction
in daily worker hangs in production. Hermes is closed-source and
operates at hyperscale within a proprietary infrastructure stack;
Micro-Hermes aims to reproduce its core architecture in an open-source,
single-node Rust implementation, validating the approach at smaller
scale and making it accessible outside Alibaba.

XLB is a related recent system that removes the sidecar proxy from
microservice communication by placing L7 load balancing logic directly
in the kernel's socket layer using eBPF (Wang et al., 2026). Rather
than requiring service A to route via a sidecar proxy to reach service
B, XLB intercepts inter-service messages in the kernel and consults an
internal load map to determine which instance of B should receive the
request, reporting up to 1.5x higher throughput and 60% lower latency
than Istio and Cilium sidecars. Like Hermes, XLB demonstrates that
kernel-level, status-aware dispatch can outperform proxy-based
approaches. Unlike Hermes (and Micro-Hermes), XLB targets inter-service
communication between microservice instances rather than intra-server
worker dispatch, making it a complementary rather than directly
competing approach.

3.5 Positioning Micro-Hermes

The related work above reveals a clear gap. Layer 4 eBPF load balancing
is mature and well-studied (Section 3.2); intra-server scheduling
research achieves strong guarantees but demands replacing the OS stack
(Section 3.3); and application-aware intra-server dispatching that
works with stock Linux — preventing individual worker processes from
becoming overloaded while others sit idle — remains the domain of
proprietary, closed-source industry systems like Hermes. Open-source,
reproducible implementations that validate and democratise this
approach are absent from the literature.

Micro-Hermes addresses this gap by providing an open-source,
single-node implementation of the Hermes architecture in Rust. It
targets the same SO_ATTACH_REUSEPORT_EBPF hook, implements the Worker
Status Table in shared memory, and benchmarks the resulting system
against models of the standard Linux mechanisms. In doing so it both
validates the original paper's claims at smaller scale and provides a
foundation that smaller organisations can build on.

4. Requirements Specification

The requirements follow from the project's nature as a replication: the
published system is the specification, and fidelity to it is the
primary requirement. Requirements are prioritised using MoSCoW
(must/should/could). Functional requirements FR1–FR7 define Phase 1's
faithful core; FR8 extends the evaluation; FR9 defines the Phase 2
boundary.

Functional requirements:

FR1 (must). Implement the Worker Status Table in shared anonymous
memory visible to all worker processes, holding per worker the three
metrics of the paper (loop-entry timestamp, pending-event count, open-
connection count), each individually atomic, partitioned so each worker
writes only its own slot, and read without locks.

FR2 (must). Implement Algorithm 1 (the scheduler): the cascading
time → connection-count → event-count filter in the paper's fixed
priority order, with the offset θ set to half the candidate average
(the paper's empirically optimal ratio), producing a candidate bitmap
written to the simulated eBPF map as a single atomic integer.

FR3 (must). Implement Algorithm 2 (the dispatcher): count the bitmap's
set bits, scale the connection's 4-tuple hash into the candidate count
using the kernel's reciprocal_scale mapping, select the Nth set bit,
and fall back to plain reuseport hashing when one or zero candidates
survive.

FR4 (must). Implement the paper's instrumented event loop in each
worker: timestamp at loop entry, batch event collection with the
paper's 5 ms timeout, per-event busy-count maintenance, connection
count maintenance on accept/close, and a scheduling pass at the end of
every iteration.

FR5 (must). Implement two baseline dispatch policies under identical
infrastructure: SO_REUSEPORT's stateless hash, and a model of epoll
exclusive's static LIFO wait-queue wakeup.

FR6 (must). Implement a workload generator reproducing the paper's four
traffic regimes (high/low connection rate × low/high per-connection
cost), including long-lived connections and an injectable mid-run
worker stall, paced precisely at a configurable connections-per-second.

FR7 (must). Record two metric streams sufficient for the evaluation:
per-connection records (arrival, dequeue, completion timestamps) and
per-loop-iteration records (WST snapshot, and for Hermes the
scheduler's per-stage survivor counts and bitmap), with seeded,
reproducible trials.

FR8 (should). Implement a fifth scenario beyond the paper — a
synchronised burst of follow-up requests across accumulated long-lived
connections — to directly measure the cost of connection concentration.

FR9 (could — Phase 2). Replace the simulated dispatch path with a real
eBPF program attached via SO_ATTACH_REUSEPORT_EBPF, real SO_REUSEPORT
sockets, and a real epoll loop.

Non-functional requirements:

NFR1 (must). Concurrency fidelity: no locks anywhere in the WST, the
candidate-map handoff, or the accept queues; per-field atomicity only,
accepting racy cross-field reads exactly as the paper does.

NFR2 (must). Portability of the kernel-facing code: the dispatcher must
be written within eBPF's constraints (no heap allocation, statically
bounded loops) so the Phase 2 port is mechanical.

NFR3 (must). Reproducibility: the full benchmark matrix and every
figure and table in the dissertation must regenerate from one command,
with per-trial seeds making runs repeatable.

NFR4 (should). Fidelity over raw performance: where the simulation must
deviate from the real system (e.g. millisecond-scale simulated work),
the deviation must be documented and its effect on conclusions argued
(Sections 8.4, 9.5).

NFR5 (should). Minimal dependencies: Phase 1 uses only the Rust
standard library plus libc (for mmap/fork/waitpid), keeping the
simulation auditable.

5. Software Engineering Process

The project is a single-developer replication study, and the process
was chosen to fit that shape: a fixed external specification (the
published paper), high correctness stakes in concurrent code, and an
evaluation whose targets are known in advance.

Development began with a close study of the Hermes paper, from which a
design document was extracted recording every architectural commitment
the implementation would need to honour — the three metrics and their
update points, the filter order, θ, the bitmap encoding, the fallback
rule, the lock-free rules, and the paper's qualitative expectations per
traffic regime. This document served as the project's requirements
baseline (Chapter 4 is derived from it) and as the arbiter whenever an
implementation shortcut was tempting: if the paper specified it, the
simulation had to honour it; if the paper left it open (such as the
hang threshold constant), the choice was recorded as
implementation-defined.

Because the requirements were fixed up front, the macro-process was
plan-driven, in the waterfall sense: the two-phase structure (userspace
simulation first, eBPF port second) and the kernel/userspace component
split were decided before any code was written, specifically so that
Phase 2 would replace components rather than restructure the system. A
strict waterfall process was not, however, applied within each phase,
since a fixed external specification does not remove the usual risk of
discovering implementation-level surprises only once code is written
(Section 8.4 records three such surprises). Within that frame,
implementation instead proceeded iteratively, in an agile-influenced
style, in vertical slices: shared-memory
region first, then the WST, the scheduler, the dispatcher, the worker
loop, the workload generator, and finally the benchmark harness — each
slice accompanied by unit tests before moving on. The test suite
encodes the paper's algorithms as executable checks: hang detection and
θ behaviour for Algorithm 1, reciprocal_scale ranges and Nth-set-bit
selection and the single/zero-candidate fallback for Algorithm 2, the
LIFO wait-queue model, and the lock-free queue's wrap-around and
overflow behaviour.

Verification of the whole system, as opposed to its parts, was
benchmark-driven: the paper's qualitative rankings per traffic regime
were written down as explicit validation targets before the benchmarks
were run, and the analysis pipeline checks them mechanically and prints
pass/fail verdicts (Section 9.1). Version control (git, hosted on GitHub) was
used throughout, with the analysis notebook, benchmark scripts and
results kept in-repository so that the entire evaluation is
reproducible from a clean checkout. Deviations discovered during development — the metrics
plumbing across fork(), the phase-locked timer artefact in the LIFO
baseline, the batch-size compensation — were treated as first-class
engineering records and are reported in Section 8.4 rather than
silently patched.

6. Ethics

The project raises no ethical concerns requiring approval. It involves
no human participants, no user studies, no personal data, and no
deployment against real traffic: all benchmark traffic is synthetic,
generated and consumed within a single machine. The artefact evaluated
is the author's own code. The system replicated is described in a
peer-reviewed publication (Pan et al., 2025); no proprietary code,
data, or confidential material from Alibaba was used or available —
the reimplementation works exclusively from the published paper, which
is standard and encouraged research practice (independent replication).
The completed ethics self-assessment form is included as an appendix.

7. Design

7.1 Two-Phase Approach and System Architecture Overview

Micro-Hermes is developed in two phases. Phase 1, the subject of this
dissertation, is a complete userspace simulation of Hermes's three-stage
feedback loop: every architectural element of the original system (the
Worker Status Table, the per-worker scheduler, the connection
dispatcher, and the shared-memory communication between them) is
implemented faithfully, while the two elements that require a Linux
kernel (the eBPF dispatch program and real sockets) are replaced by
userspace stand-ins with equivalent interfaces. Phase 2, left to future
work, replaces those stand-ins with a real eBPF program attached via
SO_ATTACH_REUSEPORT_EBPF. The Phase 1 components are divided
deliberately along the kernel/userspace line, so that this transition
swaps out components rather than restructuring the system.

The simulation reproduces Hermes's division of labour with real
operating-system processes. A parent process stands in for the kernel:
it generates synthetic connection arrivals at a configurable rate,
computes a hash standing in for the kernel's 4 tuple hash of each
connection, runs the dispatch mechanism under test, and places each
connection into the chosen worker's accept queue. Four forked child
processes stand in for the load balancer's workers, each running the
event loop from the Hermes paper:
timestamp the loop entry, collect a batch of events (an epoll_wait
analogue over the accept queue, with the paper's 5 ms timeout),
process each event, maintain the status metrics, and at the end of
every iteration run the scheduling pass. The
Worker Status Table, the candidate bitmap, and the accept queues live
in a single region of shared anonymous memory mapped before forking.

Crucially, the feedback loop is closed: a worker's load comes entirely
from the connections the dispatcher assigned to it, and the
dispatcher's decisions are driven by the bitmap the workers' schedulers
publish. Scheduling decisions therefore directly shape the measured
load distribution, which is exactly what the evaluation sets out to
test. Figure 1 shows the process layout and the shared-memory region
connecting the two sides.

[FIGURE 1 HERE — architecture diagram. To draw: two boxes joined by a
shared-mmap region. Top box "parent process (kernel stand-in)":
generator paces arrivals at the workload CPS → dispatcher picks a
worker (Algorithm 2 over M_Sel / reuseport hash / LIFO model) → pushes
into the chosen worker's accept queue. Bottom box "4 forked worker
processes": instrumented event loop (stamp time → collect batch →
process events → update WST) with schedule_and_sync (Algorithm 1) at
loop end writing the candidate bitmap to M_Sel. Middle strip "shared
anonymous memory": WST (one 64-byte slot per worker) + M_Sel (single
atomic u64) + one SPSC accept ring per worker. Arrows: workers → WST
(status writes); schedulers → M_Sel (bitmap store); dispatcher ← M_Sel
(bitmap load); dispatcher → rings → workers (connections). The ASCII
diagram in the repository README is a starting point.
Caption: Phase 1 process architecture. A parent process stands in for
the kernel, running the dispatch mechanism under test; four forked
workers run the instrumented event loop. All cross-process state —
the Worker Status Table, the M_Sel candidate bitmap, and the per-worker
accept queues — lives in one shared anonymous memory region, and the
feedback loop from worker status to dispatch decision is closed.]

7.2 Worker Status Table

The WST holds, per worker, the three status metrics of Pan et al.
(2025), each stored as an individually atomic 64-bit integer. The
paper draws the table as one row per metric spanning all workers; this
implementation transposes that layout into one slot per worker, which
changes nothing about who reads or writes which field.
The metrics are the timestamp of the most recent
event-loop entry (used for hang detection), the count of pending events
(events delivered by epoll_wait but not yet handled, a proxy for
instantaneous processing load), and the accumulated count of open
connections (a guard against future overload from synchronised bursts
on long-lived connections). Each slot is padded to a 64-byte cache line
to prevent false sharing between workers on adjacent cores.

The concurrency design is preserved exactly: the table is partitioned
by writer, with each worker updating only its own slot, and the
scheduler reads the entire table without locks. Reads may race with
updates from other workers; as in the original system this is accepted
by design, since per-field atomicity prevents torn values and a
marginally stale metric does not meaningfully change a scheduling
decision.

7.3 Kernel Connection Dispatcher

The dispatcher implements Hermes's Algorithm 2. For each new connection
it reads the candidate bitmap from M_Sel, counts the set bits, and, if
more than one candidate survives, scales the connection's hash into the
candidate count using the Linux kernel's reciprocal_scale function (a
multiply and shift mapping, reimplemented exactly) and selects the Nth
set bit of the bitmap. If one or zero candidates survive, it falls back
to plain reuseport hashing across all workers, matching the paper's
fallback rule: dispatching every connection that arrives between
scheduler updates to a single "best" worker would itself overload it.

Although Phase 1 executes this logic in the parent process rather than
in the kernel, it is written under eBPF's constraints (no heap
allocation, statically bounded loops) so that the Phase 2 port to an
eBPF program is straightforward. M_Sel itself is modelled as a single shared
atomic 64-bit integer, mirroring the atomic read/write guarantee that
BPF_MAP_TYPE_ARRAY provides in the real system. Only the
internals of this component will change in Phase 2.

7.4 Userspace Scheduler

Every worker runs Hermes's Algorithm 1 at the end of each event-loop
iteration: there is no dedicated scheduler process, exactly as in the
original design. The reason is the one established in Section 3.3: a
dedicated dispatcher or scheduler process on the connection path
becomes a bottleneck at high connection rates and a single point of
failure, whereas embedding the scheduler in every worker means
scheduling continues as long as *any* worker is alive — a property the
evaluation observes directly when a stalled worker is excluded by its
peers' schedulers (Section 9.3). The scheduler snapshots the WST and applies three
cascading filters in the paper's fixed priority order. The time filter
removes workers whose last loop entry is older than a hang threshold
(200 ms in this implementation, the paper leaves the constant
implementation-defined). The connection-count filter and the
pending-event filter each remove workers whose metric exceeds the
candidate average plus an offset theta, which prevents the candidate
set from collapsing when workers are near-uniformly loaded. Following
the paper's empirical finding that theta/avg = 0.5 is optimal, theta is
computed as half the candidate average, with a small floor so the
filter remains permissive at cold start. The surviving set is encoded
as a bitmap and written to M_Sel with a single atomic store.

Because the scheduler runs once per loop iteration and epoll_wait is
bounded by a 5 ms timeout, every worker is guaranteed to re-enter its
loop, and therefore to refresh its timestamp and re-run the scheduler,
at least once every 5 ms even with no traffic at all, keeping both
hang detection and the candidate set live under idle conditions.

7.5 Alternative Scheduling Algorithms

Two baseline dispatch mechanisms are implemented for comparison,
modelling the standard Linux mechanisms described in Section 2.3. Under
the reuseport baseline, the dispatcher applies reciprocal_scale to the
connection hash across all workers unconditionally, reproducing
SO_REUSEPORT's stateless behaviour: no awareness of worker state, and
no scheduler runs at all.

The epoll-exclusive baseline models the kernel's actual wakeup
mechanism rather than a caricature of it. In the kernel, the listen
socket's wait queue is ordered by epoll_ctl registration, and each
registration is inserted at the head of the list, so the queue order
is static: the last-registered worker sits permanently at the head. An
incoming connection wakes the first idle worker found by traversing
from the head. The simulation reproduces this using state the
generator can see: registration order is fork order, so the
highest-numbered worker is the head of the wait queue; a worker counts as idle when its
accept queue is empty and it has no pending events; and when no worker
is idle the connection goes to the shortest backlog, approximating the
shared accept queue that the next free worker would drain. All
workers, baseline and Hermes alike, run the paper's 5 ms epoll_wait
timeout (why this is safe for the baseline is discussed in
Section 8.4).

8. Implementation

8.1 Rust Toolchain and eBPF Integration

Phase 1 is implemented in Rust with a single dependency (libc,
for mmap, fork and waitpid), approximately 1,600 lines across nine
modules, with unit tests covering the scheduler's filters, the
dispatcher's bit manipulation, and the shared-memory queue. No eBPF
toolchain is required yet, but the codebase is structured for the
Phase 2 integration with Aya: the dispatcher is verifier-compatible as
written, the M_Sel wrapper exposes the same store/load interface as an
Aya array-map handle, and the WST and scheduler carry over unchanged
since they remain in userspace in the real system.

8.2 Shared Memory Communication

All cross-process state lives in one structure mapped with
mmap(MAP_SHARED | MAP_ANONYMOUS) before forking, so the parent and all
workers share the same physical pages without any IPC machinery, and
atomic operations on the shared pages are well-defined across the
process boundary. Alongside the WST and M_Sel, the region contains one
single-producer single-consumer ring buffer per worker, standing in
for the kernel's per-socket accept queue. Because each ring has
exactly one producer (the generator) and one consumer (the owning
worker), acquire/release ordering on the head and tail indices is
sufficient and the design remains lock-free throughout, mirroring the
WST's partitioned-writer principle. A full ring rejects the
connection, modelling accept-queue overflow.

8.3 Simulating the Kernel Dispatch Path

The parent process generates connections at the workload's target
rate (its connections-per-second). Rather than sleeping a fixed gap
between one arrival and the next, it pins each arrival to an absolute
point on the clock and sleeps until that time; this way, if any one
sleep overshoots slightly, the error does not build up over the run
and the overall rate stays on target.

Each connection is given three properties when it is created. The
first is a synthetic 4-tuple hash, which stands in for the hash the
kernel would normally compute from a connection's addresses and
ports; here it is produced by scrambling a simple counter with a
fixed multiplicative constant, and an optional per-trial seed varies
the sequence between benchmark runs. The second is a processing cost,
sampled from a distribution. The third is a lifetime, after which the
worker that received the connection closes it.

A worker "processes" a connection simply by sleeping for that
connection's cost. The cost is therefore a property of the connection,
not of the worker, which matches how the paper describes real Layer 7
work: how expensive a connection is depends on what it involves (a TLS
handshake, compression, protocol translation) and varies from one
connection to the next.

8.4 Engineering Challenges

Three issues encountered during implementation are worth recording.
First, metrics collection across fork(): an early design accumulated
benchmark records in a mutex-protected vector placed in the shared
region, which is unsound; a vector's heap allocation is not in the
shared mapping, and standard-library mutexes are undefined across
processes on some platforms (on macOS the underlying os_unfair_lock
aborts with EINVAL). Each worker instead buffers records privately and
writes its own file shard, which the parent merges after waitpid,
applying the WST's single-writer partitioning idea to the benchmarking
plumbing itself.

Second, a subtle fidelity artefact in the epoll-exclusive baseline.
An early version modelled the wait-queue head dynamically, as the
worker with the most recent loop-entry timestamp, and gave idle
baseline workers a periodic housekeeping timer. Because the workers
are forked simultaneously, their timers were phase-locked: each expiry
re-stamped a different worker in lock-step, rotating the concentration
target about once a second and producing per-worker totals that were
artificially near-balanced, masking the very pathology the baseline
exists to demonstrate. The fix was to model what the kernel actually
does: the wait-queue order is set at epoll_ctl registration time and
is static, with the last-registered worker permanently at the head.
With a static queue order, idle wakeups no longer reshuffle priority,
so every policy can safely share the paper's 5 ms epoll_wait timer,
and the baseline exhibits the persistent concentration the real
mechanism shows.

Third, batch sizing: real L7 events cost microseconds, but the
simulation's per-event sleeps cost milliseconds, so a realistic
epoll_wait batch limit would stretch a single loop iteration past the
hang-detection threshold and starve the scheduler of fresh status
data. The batch limit is therefore kept small (4 events), preserving
the paper's property that scheduler frequency scales with load.

9. Evaluation and Critical Appraisal

9.1 Evaluation Framework and Methodology

The evaluation reproduces the four traffic regimes used by Pan et al.
(2025), characterised by connections-per-second (CPS) and
per-connection processing cost: Case 1, high CPS with low cost (a
stress or traffic-spike scenario); Case 2, high CPS with high cost
(compression-heavy traffic, configured here as a sustained overload at
roughly 112% of aggregate worker capacity, with a 400 ms stall
injected into one worker); Case 3, low CPS with low cost but
long-lived connections that never close within the run (the
finance/chat pattern, and the most common case in Alibaba's
production); and Case 4, low CPS with high cost (TLS- and regex-heavy
web services). A fifth scenario, beyond the
paper's four, repeats Case 3's accumulation of long-lived connections
and then fires a follow-up request on every open connection
simultaneously, providing direct evidence for the cost of connection
concentration (Section 9.2, Case 5).

Following the paper's Table 3 methodology, each of the four cases is
additionally swept across three offered-load levels — light, medium
and heavy — by scaling the case's connection arrival rate while
holding its cost distribution fixed. Utilisation (offered load divided
by the four workers' aggregate service capacity) spans roughly 10% to
75% for Case 1, 45% to 112% for Case 2 (its heavy level is a sustained
overload; the 400 ms stall is part of the case's profile and is
injected at every level), and 28% to 93% for Case 4;
Case 3's cost is trivial, so its levels instead scale how many
long-lived connections accumulate (120, 240 and 600 per run). The
detailed per-case analysis in Section 9.2 uses each case's
*characteristic* level — the level at which the scenario's defining
behaviour is clearest (light for Case 1, where sub-capacity load
exposes the LIFO concentration pathology in its purest form; heavy
for Case 2, whose defining feature is the overload; medium for Cases
3 and 4) — and the full sweep is then reported separately (Table 2)
to test whether the rankings hold as load varies, which is where the
paper's own rankings are defined.

Each of the three dispatch policies is run against every case and
load level three times, with a per-trial seed varying the
(reproducible) sequence of connection hashes and sampled processing
costs. Two record streams are collected: one row per completed
connection (arrival, dequeue and completion timestamps, so that
latency includes both queueing delay and service time), and one row
per worker event-loop iteration (a WST snapshot plus, for
Micro-Hermes, the scheduler's per-stage survivor counts and bitmap).
Three metrics are derived, matching the paper's: latency (mean and
99th percentile; percentiles are computed within each trial and then
aggregated across trials), throughput (completed connections per
second, informative once offered load approaches or exceeds
capacity), and load balance (the standard deviation of per-worker
connection counts, the metric the Hermes paper uses for its
production comparison). The full pipeline, from benchmark execution
to every figure and table referenced below, is reproducible from a
single annotated Jupyter notebook in the project repository.

[TABLE 1 HERE — analysis/tables/summary_stats.tex
Caption: Latency and balance per dispatch policy across all five
scenarios at each case's characteristic load level (mean over 3
trials; p99 shown ± sd across trials). Case 5 rows are burst follow-up
requests, measured from the burst instant.]

9.2 Benchmarks: Micro-Hermes vs reuseport vs epoll_exclusive

Table 1 summarises latency and balance for every scenario; Figure 2
shows the full latency distributions (one panel per case) and Figure 3
isolates the 99th percentile with its trial-to-trial spread. The
following paragraphs walk through the cases in turn.

[FIGURE 2 HERE — analysis/figures/fig1_latency_cdf.pdf
Caption: Latency distributions (queueing + processing) per dispatch
policy, one panel per workload case at its characteristic load level,
log x-axis, trials pooled. In the light-load cases (1 and 3) the three
policies are indistinguishable. Under load (Cases 2 and 4) reuseport's
blind hash produces a heavy tail — it keeps assigning connections to
busy or stalled workers — while Micro-Hermes routes around them.]

[FIGURE 3 HERE — analysis/figures/fig2_p99_bars.pdf
Caption: 99th-percentile connection latency per policy (bars: mean of
per-trial p99; error bars: min–max across trials; note the independent
y-scales). Under load, reuseport's p99 exceeds Micro-Hermes's — by
roughly 30% in Case 2 and 2.2x in Case 4. The LIFO model's low latency in those
cases is a simulation boundary discussed in Section 9.5, and Figure 8
shows the liability that accompanies it.]

Case 1 (high CPS, low cost). When requests are cheap and the system is
far below capacity, all three policies deliver essentially the same
latency: every policy completes a typical connection in 1.3 ms. The
mechanisms differ sharply in how fairly they spread the work. Across
the 1,200 connections of a run, Micro-Hermes distributes most evenly
(a standard deviation of 14 connections between workers, against 29
for reuseport), while the epoll-exclusive model sends every single
connection to the wait-queue head worker (standard deviation 520):
because each request is processed faster than the next one arrives,
the head worker is always idle again in time to be woken next, and the
other three workers never receive anything. Micro-Hermes's tail is
marginally higher than the baselines' (99th percentile 1.9 ms against
1.4 ms). The cause is structural rather than incidental: Stage 3 never
picks the single best worker for a connection, only hashes it to one
of a subset of roughly acceptable candidates that Stage 2 handed
down. In one trial, about 0.6% of connections happened to hash to a
candidate that was momentarily busier than some other worker excluded
from that subset, and briefly queued behind it. That handful of
connections is the price of the two-stage design - restricting the
kernel's hash to a subset, rather than letting it pick freely among
all workers, occasionally rules out the least-loaded one. This is
consistent with the paper's own ranking for this regime, which places
plain reuseport marginally ahead of Hermes when load is trivially
light, precisely because Hermes's worker-awareness has nothing to
protect against yet and its candidate-subset overhead shows up as pure
cost.

Case 2 (high CPS, high cost, with an injected hang). This case pushes
the offered load slightly past what the four workers can process, so
queues grow throughout the run and latency is dominated by waiting.
Here awareness of worker status pays off directly: Micro-Hermes
achieves a mean latency of 570 ms against reuseport's 784 ms (27%
lower), and a 99th percentile of 1,579 ms against 2,037 ms.
The gap has a simple cause: reuseport's hash does not know that a
worker is busy or stalled, so it keeps sending roughly a quarter of
all new connections to the stalled worker for the full duration of
the stall, while Micro-Hermes routes around it. The epoll-exclusive
model posts the lowest latency of all (mean 414 ms); Section 9.5
explains why this is a boundary of the simulation rather than a
property of the real mechanism.

Case 3 (low CPS, long-lived connections). This case reproduces the
paper's headline production result. Because connections never close
within the run, every dispatch decision is permanent: mistakes
accumulate over time, and the balance of open connections
at the end of the run exposes each mechanism's character. Figure 4
shows that balance as a trajectory over the run, and Figure 5 shows
who actually ends up holding the work. The
epoll-exclusive model ends with a standard deviation of 104
connections - the head worker holds all 240 connections of the run
while the other three hold none - against 15 for Micro-Hermes and 14
for reuseport. This is the same ordering the paper reports from
production (standard deviations of 3,200, 50 and 20 for exclusive,
reuseport and Hermes respectively). Micro-Hermes matches rather than
beats reuseport here; Section 9.5 discusses why parity is the faithful
expectation in this synthetic simulated setting.

[FIGURE 4 HERE — analysis/figures/fig3_balance_over_time.pdf
Caption: Standard deviation of per-worker open-connection counts
during a Case 3 run (long-lived connections; mean over trials, bands
span min–max). Micro-Hermes and reuseport hold the imbalance near-flat
as connections accumulate. Under the LIFO model the imbalance grows
linearly: at this low arrival rate the wait-queue head worker is
always idle again before the next connection arrives, so it receives
every one.]

[FIGURE 5 HERE — analysis/figures/fig4_concentration_profile.pdf
Caption: Connections handled per worker in Case 3, ranked busiest to
least busy within each trial (bars: mean over trials; error bars:
min–max; dashed line: even share). Under the LIFO model the head
worker takes all 240 connections in every trial and the remaining
three take none. Micro-Hermes and reuseport sit close to the even
share at every rank.]

Case 4 (low CPS, high cost). With expensive requests at moderate
utilisation (about 75%), the danger is queueing a new connection
behind a slow worker which is already busy. Micro-Hermes's
99th-percentile latency of 442 ms is less than half of reuseport's
975 ms as it avoids doing this. Reuseport, as it hashes
blindly, cannot. The epoll-exclusive model again leads (295 ms), with
Micro-Hermes tracking it as the paper predicts: Hermes's
status detection reacts with a small delay where exclusive reacts
immediately.

Case 5 (synchronised burst on long term connections). Cases 1 to 4
measure the latency of new connections, which cannot show why
concentration is dangerous: a worker hoarding idle connections pays no
visible penalty while they stay idle. Case 5 makes the danger
measurable and shows why the thus far top performing LIFO is
insufficient. It repeats Case 3's accumulation - by 2.5 seconds each
policy has dispatched roughly 150 long-lived connections - and then
every open connection fires one 5 ms follow-up request at the same
instant, modelling the synchronised bursts (a market opening for
finance traffic, a mass push notification for chat) that the WST's
connection count metric exists to guard against. Because a request on
an established connection can only be processed by the worker that
owns it, the burst is processed exactly as unevenly as the connections
were dispatched. Under the epoll-exclusive model the head worker owns
all of the connections and must work through the entire backlog alone:
the median follow-up waits 405 ms and the 99th percentile 801 ms.
Micro-Hermes and reuseport, having spread the same connections across
all four workers, complete the same burst with a median of 107 ms and
a 99th percentile of roughly 250 ms (Figure 8). This is the measured
form of the
trade-off the raw latency numbers of Cases 2 and 4 conceal: the
epoll-exclusive model's fast dispatch coexists with a standing
liability that comes due the moment its hoarded connections wake up.

[FIGURE 8 HERE — analysis/figures/fig7_burst.pdf
Caption: Latency of follow-up requests when every open connection
fires one simultaneously (Case 5, ~150 open connections at burst time,
trials pooled, measured from the burst instant). Under the LIFO model
one worker owns every connection and must serialise the entire burst —
the straight-diagonal CDF is the signature of a single queue draining
at a constant rate — while Micro-Hermes and reuseport, having spread
the same connections across all four workers, complete it 3–4x
faster.]

Across all five cases Micro-Hermes never collapses: where it is not
the best policy it trails the best by a fraction of a millisecond
(Case 1) or a small margin (Cases 2 and 4), whereas each baseline
fails badly in at least one regime - epoll-exclusive on balance in
Cases 1 and 3 and on burst latency in Case 5, reuseport on latency in
Cases 2 and 4. This adaptability, rather than outright victory in any
single regime, is the core property claimed for the Hermes
architecture, and the simulation reproduces it.

Load sensitivity. The paper's rankings are defined across a sweep of
offered load, not at a single point, so Table 2 repeats the comparison
at light, medium and heavy load for each of the four cases, reporting
the paper's three metrics (mean latency, P99, throughput).

[TABLE 2 HERE — analysis/tables/load_sweep.tex
Caption: The Table-3-style load sweep: mean latency, P99 and
throughput per policy at light/medium/heavy offered load in each case
(mean over 3 trials). Every Case 2 level carries the injected
stall.]

The sweep confirms that the rankings above are not artefacts of one
operating point, and reproduces the paper's central load-dependence
claim: the value of worker-awareness grows with load. In Case 1,
where all three policies are indistinguishable at light and medium
load, heavy load (75% utilisation) separates them: reuseport's mean
latency rises to 13.4 ms and its 99th percentile to 33 ms as hash
collisions land connections behind busy workers, while Micro-Hermes
holds 3.7 ms and 24 ms — reproducing the paper's ranking flip for
this case, where reuseport is marginally ahead of Hermes at light
load but behind it once load is heavy. In Cases 2 and 4 the
Micro-Hermes-over-reuseport gap widens monotonically with load: Case
4's mean-latency ratio grows from 1.2x at light load to 2.5x at
medium and 2.8x at heavy, with the 99th percentile reaching 638 ms
against 1,864 ms. Throughput tells the same story from the other
side: once offered load approaches capacity, reuseport can no longer
even sustain the arrival rate — at Case 2's medium level (84%
utilisation) it completes 59 connections/s of the 75 offered where
Micro-Hermes completes 69, and at Case 4's heavy level it completes
35/s against Micro-Hermes's 45 — because connections hashed onto
overloaded workers sit in queues rather than completing. Case 3 shows
latency parity at every level, as expected: its per-connection cost
is trivial and its failure mode is balance, not latency, which
Figures 4 and 5 already capture. The epoll-exclusive model posts the
lowest raw latency at every level of Cases 2 and 4 for the reason
established in Section 9.5 — its fallback path reads per-worker
backlogs that the real mechanism does not have — so, as throughout,
its latency column should be read as an optimistic bound rather than
a property of real epoll exclusive.

9.3 Worker Hang Prevention Results

Case 2 injects a 400 ms stall into one worker mid-run, reproducing the
kind of hang that motivated the original Hermes paper. The recorded
scheduler decisions show the mechanism working as intended: in every
trial, the stalled worker is removed from the candidate bitmap within
the 200 ms hang threshold of the stall starting (56-192 ms across
trials), and readmitted within milliseconds of re-entering its loop.
Figure 6 traces one such episode end to end.

[FIGURE 6 HERE — analysis/figures/fig5_hang_detection.pdf
Caption: Hang detection during a Case 2 run with a 400 ms stall
injected into worker 0 (shaded). Top: worker 0's pending-event count
in the WST freezes during the stall and drains after recovery.
Bottom: worker 0's presence in the candidate bitmap — excluded at
stall onset (guaranteed within the 200 ms hang threshold once its
timestamp goes stale, arrow) and readmitted when it resumes and
re-stamps the WST.]

The exclusion happens in two steps. Usually the worker drops out of
candidacy almost immediately, because it stalls while still holding a
batch of unprocessed events, and the load filters exclude it on that
basis alone. As a backstop, the time filter guarantees exclusion by
200 ms into the stall (the configured hang threshold) regardless, once
the worker's loop-entry timestamp has gone stale. The worker is
readmitted once the stall ends and it re-enters its loop, re-stamping
the WST.

Notably, this exclusion is carried out by the other workers'
schedulers, since the stalled worker cannot run its own - confirming
the value of embedding the scheduler in every worker rather than
running it as a separate process. Over the same window, the reuseport
baseline keeps assigning roughly a quarter of new connections to the
stalled worker: exactly the failure mode that motivated Hermes's
timestamp-based hang detection, observed directly here.

9.4 Scheduler Filter Behaviour

The per-stage survivor counts recorded at every scheduling pass show
the cascading filter behaving as the paper describes (Figure 7).
Under light
load (Cases 1 and 3), the filters barely prune anything: on average
3.7 to 3.8 of the four workers survive all three stages.

[FIGURE 7 HERE — analysis/figures/fig6_cascade_stages.pdf
Caption: Mean number of workers surviving each stage of the
scheduler's cascading filter, per case (Hermes runs; error bars: ±1 sd
across trials). Light-load cases prune almost nothing; the overloaded
Case 2 prunes hardest, and only the high-cost cases (2 and 4) see the
hang filter (Stage 1) remove workers — the injected stall, plus workers
stuck in long processing batches that are indistinguishable from
hangs.]

Under heavier load, the candidate set shrinks. This is most visible in
the overloaded Case 2, where the mean surviving set falls to 2.6 of 4
workers after the third filter, and the event count filter does most
of that pruning. Case 2 is also where the time filter itself prunes
hardest (a mean of 3.5 survivors after stage one, against 3.7 in the
other high-cost case, Case 4, and none at all in the light-load cases).
This is not just the injected stall: a worker that spends several
hundred milliseconds inside a single loop iteration processing a batch
of slow events looks, from the WST's point of view, exactly like a
hung worker, and gets treated as one. This is arguably correct, since
either way it cannot accept new work promptly.

Overall, this matches the paper's observation that the fraction of
workers passing the coarse filter shrinks as load increases, while
theta's margin stops the set collapsing to a single candidate.
A collapse that would forfeit the kernel's fine-grained selection and
trigger the fallback path instead.

9.5 Discussion

Two results deviate from the paper's rankings, and both are boundaries
of a userspace simulation rather than defects of the architecture;
they are recorded here as limitations of making a userspace simulation.

First, the epoll-exclusive model wins on raw latency in Cases 2 and 4,
whereas the paper places Hermes ahead of exclusive under high
processing cost. This is the simulation's sharpest limitation, and it
follows from an architectural difference between the real mechanisms
that the Phase 1 version does not fully honour. Real SO_REUSEPORT - and
therefore both reuseport and Micro-Hermes, which build on it - gives
every worker its own listening socket with its own kernel accept queue,
where each worker takes only its own queue. The simulation reproduces this
faithfully with one queue per worker. Real epoll-exclusive is different
as all workers share a single socket and a single accept queue, and
therefore the kernel's only decision is which idle worker to wake to drain
it. Because there are no per-worker queues in that design, there is no
per-worker backlog for it to inspect. The simulated baseline, however,
reuses the per-worker-queue infrastructure that the other two policies
genuinely require, and its fallback path - taken once every worker is
busy, as under Case 2's overload - hands each connection to whichever
of the four queues is currently shortest. This is a load-aware decision,
and the reason the simulated LIFO posts strong latency and even balance
together in Case 2. The real mechanism could not make that decision at
all as it is completely blind and there are no per-worker backlogs. Our
baseline is therefore better-informed than the system it represents, and
its Case 2 and 4 latency cannot be read as a property of real
epoll-exclusive even though it serves as a decent approximation.

Two further factors make this comparison harder on Micro-Hermes and
easier on exclusive, on top of the point above.

First, Micro-Hermes only updates its list of candidate workers once
per event-loop iteration - this matches how the real design works,
since the real scheduler also runs once per loop, at the end. Between
those updates, the list can be slightly out of date: a worker's queue
may have changed since the list was last built. The simulated
LIFO baseline is not limited this way - each time it dispatches a
connection, it checks every worker's actual, current queue length
individually, rather than working from a list built earlier. So the
baseline always acts on fresher information than Micro-Hermes does.

Second, real epoll-exclusive carries kernel-side costs that this
simulation leaves out entirely. In the real mechanism, waking a
worker means walking a wait-queue whose length grows with the number
of ports being listened on - the simulation only ever uses one port,
whereas a production load balancer listens on tens of thousands. On
top of that, there is a real cost to waking a thread at all, and a
problem of cache unfriendliness which was serious enough that Linux's
maintainers refused to merge a round-robin fix meant to address
exclusive's imbalance. None of these costs apply to the simulation.

Both factors point the same way: they make simulated exclusive look
better, and simulated Micro-Hermes look worse, than the real systems
would. So the latency comparison between Micro-Hermes and exclusive
should be read as conservative towards Micro-Hermes - the real gap
between them is likely larger, in Micro-Hermes's favour, than these
numbers show. Building a truly faithful simulation of epoll-exclusive
would mean giving it its own separate single-shared-queue path,
rather than reusing the per-worker queues that the other two
mechanisms actually need. Instead this effort will be spent on Phase 2,
where the real kernel dispatch settles the question directly, rather than
a second queue structure that gets thrown away along with the rest of
the simulated kernel.

Case 5 shows the other side of this same trade-off. Exclusive's low dispatch latency comes from
piling most connections onto one worker. That is fine as long as
those connections stay idle - but Case 5 has all of them fire a
request at the same moment, forcing the one worker holding them to
process the entire burst alone. The result is a latency 3-4x worse
than the other two mechanisms, which had spread those same connections
across all four workers to begin with.

The second deviation is that Micro-Hermes only matches, rather than
beats, reuseport's balance in Case 3. In the paper's production data,
reuseport's balance is worse than Hermes's (standard deviation 50
against 20) because real connections vary wildly in duration, which
degrades a stateless hash's balance over time. Case 3's synthetic
connections, by contrast, are all identical and never close, so the
hash stays near-optimal by construction and has no weakness for
Micro-Hermes to exploit. Parity is therefore the expected result here,
and the claim that still holds is the one that matters: the LIFO
model's balance is an order of magnitude worse than either
alternative's, and only status-aware dispatch avoids every failure
mode seen across all four cases.

Finally, the paper's CPU overhead figures (0.674% to 2.436% total,
across counters, scheduler, syscalls and the eBPF dispatcher) cannot
be meaningfully checked here, since the simulation's "processing" is
just sleeping rather than real work. Overhead measurement is deferred
to Phase 2, where flamegraph profiling of the real, instrumented event
loop becomes possible.

Within these stated limits, the evaluation supports Hermes's central
claims: the three stage feedback loop balances load more evenly than
either standard Linux mechanism, detects and routes around hung
workers within a bounded window using only three atomically updated
metrics, safely falls back to plain reuseport hashing on the rare
occasions its candidate set shrinks to one worker or none, and,
uniquely among the three mechanisms tested, stays competitive in every
traffic regime.

10. Conclusions

10.1 Summary of Contributions

This dissertation set out to reimplement, in the open, a closed-source
production system known only from its published description, and to
test whether that description is sufficient to reproduce the system's
claimed behaviour. Its contributions are:

First, the implementation itself: to the author's knowledge the first
open-source implementation of the Hermes architecture — the
shared-memory Worker Status Table, the per-worker cascading-filter
scheduler, and the hash-among-candidates dispatcher — written in
approximately 1,600 lines of dependency-light Rust, with the paper's
lock-free concurrency design preserved exactly and the kernel-facing
logic already written within eBPF's constraints for the Phase 2 port.

Second, a simulation methodology that keeps the architecture honest:
real forked processes communicating through genuinely shared memory,
a closed feedback loop in which scheduling decisions alone shape the
measured load distribution, and baselines that model the kernel's
actual mechanisms (including epoll exclusive's static LIFO wait
queue) rather than caricatures of them.

Third, an independent reproduction of the paper's qualitative claims:
across the four published traffic regimes, each swept over three
offered-load levels as in the paper's evaluation, the simulation
reproduces the paper's rankings wherever the simulation is competent
to test them — Hermes beats the stateless hash decisively when workers
are busy or hung, with a gap that widens monotonically with load and
extends to throughput once offered load nears capacity; balances
long-lived connections an order of magnitude more evenly than
exclusive wakeup; detects an injected worker stall within a bounded
window through the other workers' schedulers; and, uniquely among the
three mechanisms, degrades gracefully in every regime. The
two deviations from the paper's rankings were traced to identified
boundaries of a userspace simulation rather than to the architecture.

Fourth, an extension of the paper's evaluation: the synchronised-burst
scenario (Case 5) converts the paper's argument for the
connection-count metric from a rationale into a measurement, showing
the exclusive model's apparently strong latency coexisting with a 3-4x
burst-latency liability created by its connection hoarding.

10.2 Limitations

The central limitation is that Phase 1 validates the architecture, not
the kernel mechanism: no eBPF program runs, no real sockets exist, and
the paper's CPU overhead profile cannot be checked against work that
consists of sleeps. Within the simulation, the epoll-exclusive baseline
is structurally better-informed than the mechanism it models (Section
9.5), so its winning latency in Cases 2 and 4 must not be read as a
property of real epoll exclusive; the comparison is conservative
against Micro-Hermes. The evaluation scale is deliberately small — four
workers on one machine, synthetic traffic with identical cost
distributions per case, three trials per cell — so, although each case
is swept across three offered-load levels, the results establish
qualitative orderings and load trends, not production performance
numbers. Finally,
two of Hermes's production subsystems are out of scope entirely: the
TCP-RST mitigation for connections already pinned to a hung worker, and
the cluster-level anomaly detection and progressive scaling that handle
node-wide overload.

10.3 Future Work

The immediate next step is Phase 2, for which the codebase was
structured from the start: replace the simulated dispatcher with a real
eBPF program attached via SO_ATTACH_REUSEPORT_EBPF (written with Aya),
give each worker a real SO_REUSEPORT listening socket registered in a
BPF_MAP_TYPE_REUSEPORT_SOCKARRAY, and drive the system with a real
traffic generator over real epoll. The WST, scheduler, and worker
instrumentation carry over unchanged, since they live in userspace in
the real system too. Phase 2 settles the questions the simulation
cannot: the true latency ordering against real epoll exclusive, and
the CPU overhead profile, measurable by flamegraph against the paper's
published 0.674%–2.436% envelope.

Beyond Phase 2, several directions follow naturally. Scaling the worker
count towards production-like values (the paper's deployments run tens
of workers over tens of thousands of ports) would test the bitmap
encoding and filter behaviour at realistic width. Implementing the
paper's exception-handling path — proactive TCP RST of connections
pinned to a hung worker, forcing clients to reconnect through the
healthy dispatch path — would complete the reliability story. The
scheduler itself invites experimentation the closed system cannot
offer: alternative filter orderings, dynamic θ tuning, or entirely
different candidate-selection policies can be evaluated against the
same benchmark harness. Finally, the production pitfalls Alibaba
reports downstream of even balancing — per-worker round-robin restart
skew and reduced backend connection reuse — suggest a companion
investigation into worker-shared backend connection pools.

The broader conclusion is encouraging for replication research: a
carefully written systems paper, even without released code, contained
enough architectural detail to rebuild its system's behaviour — and
where this reimplementation diverged, the divergences were explicable
from first principles. Status-aware dispatch of the Hermes kind is not
tied to hyperscale infrastructure; it is a small, portable idea — three
atomic counters, two filters and a bitmap — that this project makes
available to anyone.

Appendix A: Testing Summary

Correctness was established at three levels: unit tests over the
algorithmic components, mechanical validation of whole-system
behaviour against the paper's predictions, and integrity checks in the
analysis pipeline.

Traceability to requirements. Each level of testing was chosen to close
off a specific requirement from Chapter 4, rather than testing being an
undirected activity performed after the fact. FR1 (the WST) and FR2/FR3
(Algorithms 1 and 2) are the requirements with the most precise
published specification, so they receive direct unit tests: a test
exists for each clause of each algorithm's definition, described below.
FR4 (the instrumented event loop), FR5 (the baselines) and FR6 (the
workload generator) are harder to test in isolation, since their
correctness is behavioural rather than a fixed input/output mapping;
these are instead verified through the whole-system predicates, which
encode the paper's per-regime expectations and would fail if the loop,
a baseline, or the generator misbehaved. FR7 (metrics recording) is
verified by the analysis pipeline's data-integrity checks. NFR1
(lock-free concurrency) is exercised directly by the SPSC ring test's
wrap-around and overflow cases. This mapping is what "the testing
verifies the requirements" means in this project: every must-have
requirement in Chapter 4 is the deliberate target of a named test or
predicate below, not an incidental side effect of testing the code that
happened to get written.

Unit tests (17 tests, run with cargo test) cover the components whose
correctness the evaluation depends on:

- Algorithm 1 (scheduler): the time filter marks a worker unavailable
  once its loop-entry timestamp exceeds the hang threshold and
  readmits it after a fresh stamp; cold-start behaviour is permissive
  (a worker with no history is not spuriously filtered); the
  connection-count and event-count filters prune workers above
  average-plus-theta and no others; and theta's floor prevents the
  candidate set collapsing when all workers are near-uniformly loaded.
- Algorithm 2 (dispatcher): reciprocal_scale maps arbitrary 32-bit
  hashes into [0, n) exactly as the kernel's implementation does;
  Nth-set-bit selection returns the correct worker for every bitmap
  and index combination tested; and the fallback rule engages when the
  bitmap has one or zero set bits, dispatching by plain hash across
  all workers.
- The epoll-exclusive baseline: the wait-queue model prefers the
  highest-registered idle worker and falls back to the shortest
  backlog only when no worker is idle.
- The shared-memory SPSC ring: values round-trip in order, a full ring
  rejects rather than overwrites, and head/tail indices wrap correctly
  past the buffer boundary.

Whole-system validation is benchmark-driven. The paper's qualitative
expectations per traffic regime were written down as explicit,
machine-checkable predicates before the benchmarks were run (for
example: "Case 3: LIFO's open-connection SD exceeds three times either
alternative's" or "all cases: Hermes never posts the worst P99 outside
measurement parity"). The analysis notebook evaluates all eight
predicates against every run and prints a pass/fail verdict table; all
eight hold on the submitted data. Data integrity is asserted at load
time: every expected policy × case × load × trial combination must be
present, and no negative latencies may exist.

Debugging during development relied on the VERBOSE per-iteration trace
(every worker loop iteration with its WST snapshot and scheduling
decision) and on the per-run console summary, which reports per-worker
dispatch/completion/drop counts that must reconcile with the
generator's totals. The two artefacts recorded in Section 8.4 — the
unsound shared-memory Mutex<Vec> and the phase-locked timer artefact
in the LIFO baseline — were both found through these traces.

Appendix B: User Manual

Requirements. A stable Rust toolchain (rustup.rs); any Unix-like OS
with libc (developed on macOS, targets Linux; no OS-specific code
paths). The analysis pipeline additionally needs Python 3 with pandas,
numpy and matplotlib, and Jupyter.

Building and running a single simulation:

    cargo run --release

Configuration is via environment variables:

    POLICY         hermes | lifo | reuseport      (default: hermes)
    WORKLOAD_CASE  1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | default    (default: default)
    LOAD           light | medium | heavy         (default: the
                   case's characteristic level)
    SEED           integer; varies the connection stream between
                   trials, reproducibly                (default: 0)
    METRICS_PATH   per-iteration tick CSV   (default: metrics.csv)
    CONNS_PATH     per-connection CSV       (default: conns.csv)
    VERBOSE        1 to print every worker loop iteration

For example, the overloaded compression-heavy case under the Hermes
policy:

    POLICY=hermes WORKLOAD_CASE=2 LOAD=heavy cargo run --release

Each run prints a summary (per-worker dispatch/completion counts,
balance SDs, and latency percentiles) and writes the two CSVs.

Reproducing every figure and table in this dissertation:

    cd analysis && jupyter lab hermes_analysis.ipynb
    # then: Kernel → Restart & Run All

or headless:

    jupyter nbconvert --to notebook --execute --inplace \
        analysis/hermes_analysis.ipynb

The notebook builds the simulator, runs the full benchmark matrix (3
policies × {4 cases × 3 load levels + Case 5} × 3 trials, ≈ 8 minutes;
existing results are reused), and regenerates all figures
(analysis/figures/, PNG and PDF) and tables (analysis/tables/, CSV and
LaTeX). Delete analysis/results/ to force fresh data; set TRIALS in
the notebook's first code cell for more trials.

Unit tests:

    cargo test

Appendix C: Ethics Self-Assessment

[todo: attach the completed School of Computer Science ethics
self-assessment / preliminary ethics form here, as referenced in
Chapter 6.]

References

-   Aya Contributors. (2024). Aya: An eBPF library for the Rust
    programming language. https://github.com/aya-rs/aya

-   Barbette, T., Katsikas, G. P., Maguire Jr., G. Q., & Kostić, D.
    (2019). RSS++: load and state-aware receive side scaling.
    Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Emerging
    Networking Experiments and Technologies (CoNEXT '19), 318–333.
    https://doi.org/10.1145/3359989.3365412

-   Barbette, T., Tang, C., Yao, H., Kostić, D., Maguire Jr., G. Q.,
    Papadimitratos, P., & Chiesa, M. (2020). A High-Speed
    Load-Balancer Design with Guaranteed Per-Connection-Consistency.
    17th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and
    Implementation (NSDI 20).
    https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi20/presentation/barbette

-   Baron, J. (2015a). epoll: add EPOLLEXCLUSIVE flag [kernel patch
    posting, merged in Linux 4.5]. https://lwn.net/Articles/667087/

-   Baron, J. (2015b). epoll: introduce round robin wakeup mode
    [kernel patch posting, unmerged]. https://lwn.net/Articles/634781/

-   Brisco, T. (1995). DNS Support for Load Balancing. RFC 1794,
    Internet Engineering Task Force.
    https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc1794

-   Cilium Authors. (2024). Cilium: eBPF-based networking, security,
    and observability. https://cilium.io/

-   Corbet, J. (2015). Epoll evolving. LWN.net.
    https://lwn.net/Articles/633422/

-   Demers, A., Keshav, S., & Shenker, S. (1989). Analysis and
    simulation of a fair queuing algorithm. ACM SIGCOMM Computer
    Communication Review, 19(4), 1–12.

-   eBPF.io. (2024). What is eBPF? https://ebpf.io/

-   Envoy Proxy Authors. (2024). Envoy: An open source edge and service
    proxy. https://www.envoyproxy.io/

-   Eisenbud, D. E., Yi, C., Contavalli, C., Smith, C., Kononov, R.,
    Mann-Hielscher, E., Cilingiroglu, A., Cheyney, B., Shang, W., &
    Hosein, J. D. (2016). Maglev: A Fast and Reliable Software Network
    Load Balancer. 13th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design
    and Implementation (NSDI 16).
    https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi16/technical-sessions/presentation/eisenbud

-   Fayed, M., Bauer, L., Giotsas, V., Kerola, S., Majkowski, M.,
    Odintsov, P., Sitnicki, J., Chung, T., Levin, D., Mislove, A.,
    Wood, C. A., & Sullivan, N. (2021). The ties that un-bind:
    decoupling IP from web services and sockets for robust addressing
    agility at CDN-scale. Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2021
    Conference, 433–446. https://doi.org/10.1145/3452296.3472922

-   Fried, J., Ruan, Z., Ousterhout, A., & Belay, A. (2020). Caladan:
    Mitigating Interference at Microsecond Timescales. 14th USENIX
    Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 20).
    https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi20/presentation/fried

-   Gandhi, R., Hu, Y. C., & Zhang, M. (2016). Yoda: a highly
    available layer-7 load balancer. Proceedings of the Eleventh
    European Conference on Computer Systems (EuroSys '16).
    https://doi.org/10.1145/2901318.2901352

-   Garrett, O. (2015). Inside NGINX: How We Designed for Performance
    & Scale. NGINX Blog.
    https://blog.nginx.org/blog/inside-nginx-how-we-designed-for-performance-scale

-   HAProxy Technologies. (2024). HAProxy: The reliable, high
    performance TCP/HTTP load balancer. https://www.haproxy.org/

-   Høiland-Jørgensen, T., Brouer, J. D., Borkmann, D., Fastabend, J.,
    Herbert, T., Ahern, D., & Miller, D. (2018). The eXpress Data
    Path: Fast Programmable Packet Processing in the Operating System
    Kernel. Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on
    emerging Networking EXperiments and Technologies (CoNEXT '18),
    54–66. https://doi.org/10.1145/3281411.3281443

-   Kaffes, K., Chong, T., Humphries, J. T., Belay, A., Mazières, D.,
    & Kozyrakis, C. (2019). Shinjuku: Preemptive Scheduling for
    µsecond-scale Tail Latency. 16th USENIX Symposium on Networked
    Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 19).
    https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi19/presentation/kaffes

-   Kerrisk, M. (2013). The SO_REUSEPORT socket option. LWN.net.
    https://lwn.net/Articles/542629/

-   Kogias, M., Iyer, R., & Bugnion, E. (2020). Bypassing the Load
    Balancer Without Regrets. Proceedings of the 11th ACM Symposium on
    Cloud Computing (SoCC '20).
    https://marioskogias.github.io/docs/crab.pdf

-   Lemon, J. (2001). Kqueue: A Generic and Scalable Event
    Notification Facility. Proceedings of the FREENIX Track: 2001
    USENIX Annual Technical Conference, 141–153.

-   Linux Kernel Documentation. (2024). Extensible Scheduler Class
    (sched_ext).
    https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/next/scheduler/sched-ext.html

-   Linux man-pages. (2023). epoll(7) — Linux Programmer's Manual.
    https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/epoll.7.html

-   Linux man-pages. (2024). io_uring(7) — Asynchronous I/O facility.
    https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/io_uring.7.html

-   Lu, Y., Xie, Q., Kliot, G., Geller, A., Larus, J. R., & Greenberg,
    A. (2011). Join-Idle-Queue: A novel load balancing algorithm for
    dynamically scalable web services. Performance Evaluation, 68(11),
    1056–1071.

-   Majkowski, M. (2017). Why does one NGINX worker take all the load?
    Cloudflare Blog.
    https://blog.cloudflare.com/the-sad-state-of-linux-socket-balancing/

-   Matsakis, N. D., & Klock, F. S. (2014). The Rust Language.
    Proceedings of the 2014 ACM SIGAda Annual Conference on High
    Integrity Language Technology (HILT '14), 103–104.
    https://doi.org/10.1145/2663171.2663188

-   McCanne, S., & Jacobson, V. (1993). The BSD Packet Filter: A New
    Architecture for User-level Packet Capture. Proceedings of the
    USENIX Winter 1993 Conference, 259–270.
    https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenix-winter-1993-conference/bsd-packet-filter-new-architecture-user-level-packet

-   Mitzenmacher, M. (2001). The Power of Two Choices in Randomized
    Load Balancing. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed
    Systems, 12(10), 1094–1104.

-   Molnar, I. (2007). Modular scheduler core and completely fair
    scheduler. Linux Kernel Mailing List.
    https://lwn.net/Articles/230501/

-   Moon, Y., Lee, S., Jamshed, M. A., & Park, K. (2020). AccelTCP:
    Accelerating Network Applications with Stateful TCP Offloading.
    17th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and
    Implementation (NSDI 20).
    https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi20/presentation/moon

-   Naseer, U., Niccolini, L., Pant, U., Frindell, A., Dasineni, R., &
    Benson, T. A. (2020). Zero Downtime Release: Disruption-free Load
    Balancing of a Multi-Billion User Website. Proceedings of the ACM
    SIGCOMM 2020 Conference, 529–541.
    https://doi.org/10.1145/3387514.3405885

-   NGINX. (2015). Socket Sharding in NGINX Release 1.9.1. NGINX Blog.
    https://www.f5.com/company/blog/nginx/socket-sharding-nginx-release-1-9-1

-   NGINX. (2021). Our Roadmap for QUIC and HTTP/3 Support in NGINX.
    NGINX Blog.
    https://blog.nginx.org/blog/our-roadmap-quic-http-3-support-nginx

-   NGINX. (2024). Core functionality: accept_mutex. NGINX
    documentation.
    https://nginx.org/en/docs/ngx_core_module.html#accept_mutex

-   Olteanu, V., Agache, A., Voinescu, A., & Raiciu, C. (2018).
    Stateless Datacenter Load-balancing with Beamer. 15th USENIX
    Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation
    (NSDI 18), 125–139.
    https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi18/presentation/olteanu

-   Ousterhout, A., Fried, J., Behrens, J., Belay, A., & Balakrishnan,
    H. (2019). Shenango: Achieving High CPU Efficiency for
    Latency-sensitive Datacenter Workloads. 16th USENIX Symposium on
    Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 19).
    https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi19/presentation/ousterhout

-   Pan, T., Song, E., Zuo, Y., Zhang, S., Song, Y., Zhao, J., Hou, W.,
    Lu, J., Sun, X., Zhang, S., Yang, Y., Zhang, J., Huang, T., Lyu, B.,
    Li, X., Wen, R., Zong, Z., & Zhu, S. (2025). Hermes: Enhancing
    Layer-7 Cloud Load Balancers with Userspace-Directed I/O Event
    Notification. Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2025 Conference,
    363–380. https://doi.org/10.1145/3718958.3750469

-   Patel, P., Bansal, D., Yuan, L., Murthy, A., Greenberg, A., Maltz,
    D. A., Kern, R., Kumar, H., Zikos, M., Wu, H., Kim, C., & Karri,
    N. (2013). Ananta: Cloud Scale Load Balancing. Proceedings of the
    ACM SIGCOMM 2013 Conference.
    https://doi.org/10.1145/2486001.2486026

-   Pesterev, A., Strauss, J., Zeldovich, N., & Morris, R. T. (2012).
    Improving network connection locality on multicore systems.
    Proceedings of the 7th ACM European Conference on Computer Systems
    (EuroSys '12), 337–350. https://doi.org/10.1145/2168836.2168870

-   PostgreSQL Global Development Group. (2024). Overview of
    PostgreSQL Internals. PostgreSQL documentation.
    https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/overview.html

-   Prekas, G., Kogias, M., & Bugnion, E. (2017). ZygOS: Achieving Low
    Tail Latency for Microsecond-scale Networked Tasks. Proceedings of
    the 26th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP '17).
    https://doi.org/10.1145/3132747.3132780

-   Shirokov, N., & Dasineni, R. (2018). Open-sourcing Katran, a
    scalable network load balancer. Meta Engineering Blog.
    https://engineering.fb.com/2018/05/22/open-source/open-sourcing-katran-a-scalable-network-load-balancer/

-   Vieira, M. A. M., Castanho, M. S., Pacífico, R. D. G., Santos,
    E. R. S., Câmara Júnior, E. P. M., & Vieira, L. F. M. (2020). Fast
    Packet Processing with eBPF and XDP: Concepts, Code, Challenges,
    and Applications. ACM Computing Surveys, 53(1), 1–36.
    https://doi.org/10.1145/3371038

-   Wang, Y., Shou, C., Qian, J., & Liu, G. (2026). XLB: A High
    Performance Layer-7 Load Balancer for Microservices using
    eBPF-based In-kernel Interposition. arXiv preprint
    arXiv:2602.09473. https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.09473

-   Yang, R., & Kogias, M. (2023). HEELS: A Host-Enabled eBPF-Based
    Load Balancing Scheme. Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on eBPF and
    Kernel Extensions (eBPF '23).
    https://doi.org/10.1145/3609021.3609307

-   Zhang, W. (2000). Linux Virtual Server for Scalable Network
    Services. Proceedings of the Ottawa Linux Symposium 2000.
    http://www.linuxvirtualserver.org/ols/lvs.pdf
